So our next topic, new topic is array.
So in this video I'll give you introduction to array and how to use them and explain about them, then in the
coming videos we will write on the programs using arrays.
Let us understand arrays so for understanding arrays.
If you are comfortable with mathematics let us start with mathematics.
See in mathematics there are two types of values.
One is scalar vlaue, scalar value means
Single value by definition scalar means magnitude.
so it means a single value.
Then next is vector, then what is a vector, vector is a list of values means.
It is having magnitude as well as dimension.
So yes this is the list of values.
This a single dimension list of values.
So if you have more than one value. now it's a single value we will call  X. now multiple values that
are also called as A.
Now how come single name is used for all the values. so in mathematics
We differentiate like this.
we say this is A1,  in mathematics we start from one.
So for us let us take it from zero.
Because in mathematics you can start from zero also, one also.
Let us start from zero.
This is A0.
This is A1.
This is a A2.
This is A3.
This is A4.
So on.
Okay.
This values is A0.
Yes.
Next is A1.
so instead of writing the name every time, I will say 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9.
Yes this is A of zero, like in mathematics you might have used this one x1 x2 x3 x 4.
So these are multiple values.
They are differentiated by their subscript, this is  a subscript.
So yes these are subscript.
So this is the concept for mathematics.
If you have the list of elements so you will give single name and you differentiate them with their
index or subscript that is 0 1 2 3 4 so on.
Same concept is applied in programming models.
So let us come to C++ in C++.
If I have to store a single value then I have to declare a variable, so variable will have a data type.
Let us say it as integer type x assign 5.
So this is a integer type variable.
X having value 5.
So we know very well that integer takes two bytes.
We are assuming this right, integer takes 2 bytes.
So this will consume two bytes of memory and then in that value 5 will be stored.
So this is named as X and if I write the address is also.
So let us say the address of first bite is 200 and next bite is 201.
So int takes 2 bytes and in that value 5 is stored, we know about this one
Now next how to have the list of elements.
Yes that concept is arrays.
Arrays in programming or in C++.
So how to declare that, how to store so so many values in a single variable.
See this.
I will say integer A,  ok name is A, then i can store only one value.
No no I can mention the size also.
Okay I can mention the size, A of size 10, these are square brackets.
If size 10.
Now you can store 10 values with same name A.
then how it looks like in the memory so it will allocate memory for 10 integers. these are all 10 int
Now this is index 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 so these are name basis and the name for all of them is A this
is what we get an array.
So all these 10 integers are side by side we say contiguous or side by side.
If you want to see the memory alocated,
Let us say the first byte's adress is three hundred.
As each is an integer only all these are integer total we have 10 integer so first int memory is
300 and 30, right. next is a three hundred and two and three, next is four and five and this
is six and seven means this is three hundred and six and seven, eight and nine, goes on.
So how many bytes it's consuming total it will consume 20 bytes 10 integers two bites each total 20 bytes
of memory.
This was just two bytes because that was just single integer.
This is how I can create 10 variables with one name so we say its an array.
Now I want to store those elements.
Yes you can store all those elements one by one in al these locations. now how to store them.
Let us see, suppose here in X, when i want to create X and want to assign 5 that time only
I have initialized, we are familiar with the initialization, now can i initialize this one.
Yes we can initialize this also.
So here only assign in embraces that is in Flower bracket,
write down all those elements that are 5 8 3 9 7 4 8 6 3 and 2 so those values will be filled here 5
8 3 9 7 4 8 6 3 2.
That will be familiar.
This is how it will be stored.
So that's it.
I'm able to store list of values under one name.
Now how do you differentiate what is this value.
This is a of 4, then what is the this value? A of 3.
What is this value, A of 8, index 8
So we can access each of them by using their index.
How to access them let us see.
if Suppose I want to print this nine, so I have to say A of three.
So Cout A of three. so when I say A of 3, 9 will be printed.
Right.
So individual all the elements you can print whichever one you want.
You have to use array name and you have to use it index Cout A of eight.
Can you tell me which value will be printed.
Yes, 8 is 3, value is three there, so three will be printed. and one more thing,
Students ask this, they get confused here.
If I say cout A it should spend a whole array.
No it will not print the whole array.
If you say cout A, it will not print the entire array.
Right.
Remember this.
You have to print each and every element one by one separately, whichever one you want you print.
Or if you want to print all, you can print all of them.
Now I'll explain you how to print all these elements like one by one.
Let us see how to access an array, so for that I will write down freshly. now I have taken main function.
So first of all let me create an array, so for that I should declare an array.
So let us declare an array, integer danger of Begin a small size.
That is 5.
So then you run the program.
It will consume memory.
So if you look at the picture we have already discussed once in the video that our memory is divided
into three sections and utilize, that.
This is a code section and this is a stack and this is heap actually stock will be here and the heap
will be here.
but I'm showing  stack just ablove the code section.
so that's easy to clearly see the things.
Now when the main function is running inside main memory inside the main memory, program is running this
will take memory, so where it will take inside the stack, so it will consume memory here 1 2 3 4, 0 1
2 3 4.
So array will be created like that.
So that picture I will draw it here once again.
So let us take a bigger picture.
These are indices right.
So I already have shown you that if there is the adresses are there, if the first adress is 300, then this
301, this is 302, and 303, 304, and five and so on.
so now the array is created I want to initialize also so let us see how to initialize this I want  to initialize
with the values 2 4 6 8 and 10.
So this will be created and the values will be filled here.
Two four six eight and 10 right.
So here also I will draw it.
Now one important thing I want to print all these values.
So for printing I have to use indices.
So let me show you just one line.
I will say cout A0,  which value will be printed? just first value will be printed, 2, then I want to
print the next value, which would be A1, then next value, it should A of 2.
So can you figure out how we can change that index 0 1 2 3 4 so on.
how we can change it, do you  remember in the previous videos we have used this thing.
Yes counter, for loop because this step is repeating print the next print the next print.
Yes we can use a for loop here and we can use a counter.
So I will write down this in a for loop
So here itself i will declared a variable, I assign zero I is less than five.
So the last value will be 4, I plus plus not inside this  cout
A[i], and every element I want in the next line so say endl, this is how all the elements of an array
can be printed.
So I should say all the elements of an array can be accessed, weather you are printing them or displaying
whatever you want you can do it.
But using for loop you can go to each and every element.
So First time A[0] i is 0.
So it will be of 0, then A[1], then 2 then 3... like this we can visit all the locations in
an array.
I'll show you here.
See here and I will take i and this is A[i] let us take it, initially I is zero.
So what is this.
A of 0, 0 is what, 2, the next time I is one.
So this is A of one, A [1] is what, 4.
Value four. this one, then I will two.
So a[2],  is what, six.
So like that it can access all the elements.
So this is how all the elements are displayed.
Let's look at things again.
We have learned how to declare an array, how to initialize an array and how to access all the elements.
Now next thing I will show you how you can declare and initialize an array and  can we can have
different data types array, we will look at this one, let us look at this quickly.
This means integer type array size 5.
Yes you can have integer type array.
Can you have float type of array.
Yes we can have a float type of array also.
Can you have a character type of array.
Yes we can declare.
So you can have any data for an array.
So array can be of any type.
And if it is int, all five elements are int only.
Right.
So similar data elements, all of similar data elements, all are float, all are characters.
Next I want to initialize.
Yes you can initialize these so you can get the values like two four six eight 10 these values will
be filled, and float values if you want to initialize like one point one, two point four, three point seven
six point two, nine point five.
These values will be filled, now char type.
How do initialize character data.
A B.
These are character, characters must be enclosed in single quotes.
So this is initialize, so a declaration plus initialization, 2 things are over.
Now one more thing I will show you, can I be clearer an array of size 5 five and I mentioned only
two and four.
Yes you can mention what happens, five arrays will be created to zero one two three and four.
Now only two and four will be filled, automatically all the values will be automatically zero.
This you should know.
Next thing.
can we create an array without  giving size and get the value one two four six.
Yes.
How much array will be created.
Four Elements I have given.
So array of size four will be created.
And the values will be filled in that one, 1 2 4 6, so you can just give the values without
giving size, and the size of that array will be equal to the number of values that you have given.
So we learn one more thing.
that when you are creating an array of some size you can give all the values you can give a few values
or you can just give values don't give the size automatically it will take the size.
So these are the few things that you should know about declaration andinitialization.
So that's all in this video.
There is a demo for this one and then after that we will write some programs up on array.